The image "tachs_all" is a 5x2 layout of every tachometer backing.
When modifying the tachometers, be aware that all 10 of them must have the exact same
16-color palette. When you are at the quantizing step, replace all 10 in this image with your custom
ones. Quantize this single image to 16 colors, then take the resulting image and chop each tachometer into
their own individual 4bpp standard Tim, and also replace the tachs in the sheet.

Also, for tachs 14k and 16k, their numbering lacks their outlines.
I assume it works like so:
14 and 16 share the same tick marks as 7k and 8k, so only the pixel indexes for the lettering is replaced.
Is the lettering outline is generated by engine-side black background insertion & edge trimming?

4. The important information about this package of files:
4a. The main sheet is what we refer to as a "Nonstandard GT2 Texture sheet", because of its binary structure
and its maximum possible colors (Bit depth) per section of the sheet (CLUTs). The bit depth for these is 4bpp, so each CLUT is
limited to their own 16-color palette. Each CLUT can have any combination of colors as long as there are only 16
unique colors or less. Transparency in colors is also fully supported with black-keying transparency.
The last technical bit about these nonstandard ones is that their color palette data is actually located inside
the visual image itself, which saves a little space. This results in visual garbage at the bottom of the image, this is normal
for these.
Nonstandard GT2 Texture sheets are different from what we refer to as "Standard Tim Files", which are the standard
binary format for PS1 textures.
4b. The individual tachometer textures are standard 4bpp tim files.
(Standard tims have 3 types: 4bpp (16 colors per CLUT), 8bpp (256 Colors per CLUT), and TrueColor (unlimited colors for the whole image)
4c. The tachometer textures have an important detail to know: Both the main sheet, AND the individual one(s)
MUST BOTH be edited identically in order to achieve a proper result.
The game fetches the color palette for the tachometer texture from the sheet, but fetches the pixel indexes from the
individual texture.
4d. Another important detail is that texture sheets do not contain any information about
which color palette is assigned to which CLUT.
What this means is that you have to manually figure out which section of the sheet corresponds to which
color palette index (the palette's slot number. For example, index 0 would be the first slot on GT2TimSuite's Palette Window), and
a lot of times it isn't obvious which palette goes to which CLUT.
If you get these wrong, the palettes for each image will be messed up. That information lies inside the game engine,
so we have to abide by whatever palette index (slot) was originally assigned to which CLUT.
Sometimes there are multiple identical palettes. This indicates that there are multiple sections of the image that use
the same color palette. For example, 1st through 6th in the HUD. We would then know that those are actually 6 separate CLUTs,
not one long strip using one palette.
Speaking of giant sections with multiple images that only use one palette, the six tachometer slots in the sheet are like this.
While they are technically 6 separate things, we can see in the tool's Palette window that there's only one palette slot for them.
So in that case we would draw one box around all 6 tachometer images.