GT2TimSuite usage tutorial by Silentwarior112

This will guide you through how to use the tool, and educate you
on how tim files work for Gran Turismo 2 (other games likely apply).

The example file we will use for this guide is Gran Turismo 2's `game_status_files`
file. It holds most of the textures used in the in-race HUD.

1. game_status_files is compressed with gzip (.gz) so we have to extract it out of the
archive. 7zip is perfect for this.

2. Now we have the `game_status_files` file. This is actually a multi-file package,
so we will need to split it up into each individual file.
- Open GT2TimSuite. Click the button in the top left "Tim / GT2 Sheet / Multi-Tim".
Load `game_status_files`. The tool will detect that it is
a multi-tim package and let you know if you want to continue. Select OK and set the
destination output folder for it.

3. Now we have a folder containing the component files that made up `game_status_files`.
There are 11 files:
The first file is the main Texture sheet that contains:
6 slots for tachometer backings,
the speed numbers, gear numbers, mph / km/h text, turbo ticks, turbo backing, and more.
The rest of the files are the individual tachometer backings for each RPM graduation.

4. The important information about this package of files:
4a. The main sheet is what we refer to as a "Nonstandard GT2 Texture sheet", because of its binary structure
and its maximum possible colors (Bit depth) per section of the sheet (CLUTs). The bit depth for these is 4bpp, so each CLUT is
limited to their own 16-color palette. Each CLUT can have any combination of colors as long as there are only 16
unique colors or less. Transparency in colors is also fully supported, which will be explained later.
The last technical bit about these nonstandard ones is that their color palette data is actually located inside
the visual image itself, which saves a little space. This results in visual garbage at the bottom of the image, this is normal
for these.
Nonstandard GT2 Texture sheets are different from what we refer to as "Standard Tim Files", which are the standard
binary format for PS1 textures.

4b. The individual tachometer textures are standard 4bpp tim files.
(Standard tims have 3 types: 4bpp (16 colors per CLUT), 8bpp (256 Colors per CLUT), and TrueColor (unlimited colors for the whole image)

4c. The tachometer textures have an important detail to know: Both the main sheet, AND the individual one(s)
MUST BOTH be edited identically in order to achieve a proper result.
The game fetches the color palette for the tachometer texture from the sheet, but fetches the pixel indexes from the
individual texture.

4d. Another important detail is that texture sheets do not contain any information about
which color palette is assigned to which CLUT.
What this means is that you have to manually figure out which section of the sheet corresponds to which
color palette index (the palette's slot number. For example, index 0 would be the first slot on GT2TimSuite's Palette Window), and
a lot of times it isn't obvious which palette goes to which CLUT.

If you get these wrong, the palettes for each image will be messed up. That information lies inside the game engine,
so we have to abide by whatever palette index (slot) was originally assigned to which CLUT.
Sometimes there are multiple identical palettes. This indicates that there are multiple sections of the image that use
the same color palette. For example, 1st through 6th in the HUD. We would then know that those are actually 6 separate CLUTs,
not one long strip using one palette.

Speaking of giant sections with multiple images that only use one palette, the six tachometer slots in the sheet are like this.
While they are technically 6 separate things, we can see in the tool's Palette window that there's only one palette slot for them.
So in that case we would draw one box around all 6 tachometer images.

Another situation is multiple sections of the image that use one CLUT. In those, cases one box must be drawn to cover both sections.
Sometimes it exports cleanly, sometimes it will not. If it's not clean, you will have to edit the exported PNG and delete the unintended
graphics. Once it has been cleaned they will convert back to Tim properly. This is rare but does happen.

The last situation you might encounter is two seperate CLUTs occupying the same location and size. This happens in game_status_files
with the B A bars. Once clut is for the BA text and the grey bar backings, the other is for the bar fills.


5. Now let's actually use GT2TimSuite!
5a. Inside the folder containing the extracted files from the multi-tim package, load the first file at the top,
this is the HUD main sheet.
At first it won't look right. This is because the nonstandard GT2 sheet format also has no information about 
how many CLUTs there are or where that data actually starts.
So, in the Palette Window, we have to adjust the scan range of the CLUT search.
Each increment increases the scan range by 4 palettes.
There's no exact science to it, but usually it's pretty obvious when you've landed on the correct value.
For the tutorial, the correct number is 6.

5b. We can now see everything in the sheet clearly, but most everything appears off.
This is where you have to figure out which areas of the sheet correspond to which palette.
The main thing to maintain is the amount of CLUTs.
In this case, there are populated palettes from 0-21 (a total of 22).
That means you definitely need to draw 22 boxes and assign all 22 palettes to a box.
Sometimes there will be blank palettes in between the populated palettes, you can skip these as the tool will
automatically reproduce them when you build the tim.

If you're struggling to figure out which palette is for which thing, use this method to find them out:
Re-open the original file, then use "Load CLUT config" to load your JSON file.
This will restore the CLUT view, so you can make changes. Then export again to
save the new configuration. Run the game, check for changes.

As you change up the palettes, keep a list ready to mark down what's what.

For the tutorial, the palette slot list for this sheet is:
0 - Tachs (all 6 of them in one box) | 240x160
1 - Speed digits 0123456789 | 16x160
2 - km/h | 40x16
3 - mph  | 40x16
4 - 0123456789R/ | 192x16
5 - 1st | 36x24
6 - 2nd | 36x24
7 - 3rd | 36x24
8 - 4th | 36x24
9 - 5th | 36x24
10 - 6th | 36x24
11 - turbo ticks | 28x28
12 - turbo backing | 28x28
13 - SEIKO | 60x14
14 - Official Timer | 60x14
15 - B A and bar backings (use black background to see) | 24x32
16 - B A outline (only example of two CLUTs on top of eachother) | 24x32
17 - TireL (the one next to km/h) | 14x14
18 - Left (underneath mph) | 16x32
19 - Right (underneath 6th, to the left of the B bar) | 16x24 (This one is important to get the box position right. Leave 2px of space on the left side of the arrow.)
20 - Tire wear (Underneath 6th, next to OFFICIAL TIMER) | 16x24
21 - TireR (the one underneath SEIKO) | 14x14


5c. Draw the first box. It will be a 240x160 box starting from the top left corner of the screen.
Then on the palette window, make sure palette 0 is selected, then right-click inside the green box and
click "Set palette to selected". That section of the image is now set to palette 0.
You can also use the arrow keys up and down to set the palette of a box while the mouse is hovered over it.
Right click it again, and click Toggle lock. This will lock the size so that you don't accidentally mess it up.
When locked, the box will be orange. Green is unlocked.
Right click it again, and click Rename. This will let you label the section to whatever you want.
It is recommended to include the palette index, and the desired label. For example, on the 6 tachs, call it 00_tachs.
00 is for the palette it's assigned to, and tachs is the human label so you know what it is.
Right click it again, and click Toggle Black Background. This will do as the name suggests. This is only for viewing purposes,
this does not affect the outcome of how it gets exported or anything.
The last right-click function is Make Copy. You can copy a box and then drag it to the next section, which saves time
when you have multiple sections of the same size.

There are 21 more boxes to draw. Use the above list to draw & assign the rest.
When it comes to the exact box sizes and locations, it doesn't matter as long as you're capturing the images inside the box.
However there will be some cases where the box position does matter (in terms of visual data having transparent space around it)
In those cases you might need to adjust it slightly to fix issues. You might see solid black surrounding something that
normally should be surrounded by transparency, that's an issue with not enough transparent space around it.


6. Once you have all 22 boxes setup and palettes assigned, export it.
Click Export to PNG(s).
You will be prompted to select the export mode. For sheets, select
"Sheet Project Folder". This converts each box drawn into their own separate
PNG images to be edited individually, and outputs a JSON file that contains
the necessary information to construct a custom texture sheet.

7. Before we continue, we need to also modify the individual tachometer image, remember?
Depending on which tachometer graduation you want to modify (7k, 8k, or 9k is recommended to start with)
Load that file. The second file in the list is 6k, going up RPM graduations each file down.
Once it's loaded, you won't need to do anything but export it immediately, as this is a standard tim with a single palette!
Much easier. Click Export to PNG(s), this time selecting "Single PNG" as this is just a single image.
Or, you can use "Bulk Tim to PNG" on all of them.

8. Now for the fun part. We can modify the PNG images, then convert them back into
the necessary format.

Modify the 6 tachometers image.
Once your masterpiece is done, save the PNG image.
Don't forget to copy it over to the individual(s) as well.

Remember, this is a 4bpp-limited texture sheet.
Before you can create the custom texture sheet, all of your modified images
need to be reduced to 16 unique colors to fit inside the 4bpp limitation.
This is called quantizing.

There's a pleathura of methods out there to quantize images.
The thing with quantizing is the quality varies a lot depending on
what you're using as your quantizing tool.

The recommended tool to properly quantize images AND preserve the quality
is a program aptly named "Color Quantizer" by x128.
You can find it here: https://x128.ho.ua/color-quantizer.html

There's a specific reason why the 6 tachs image is all 6 in one CLUT box.
Couldn't you just make 6 boxes and assign the same palette?

No. Because it was one CLUT, the tool needs to read that entire area and
produce the single palette and pixel indexes in one go. Otherwise, only one tach would
look right. The editing reason specifically comes down to quantization though.
When they're all in one image, you can quantize them all at once.
This is super important, since the sheet defines the palette, but the pixel indexes
come from a different source, the individual.
Since the sheet uses one palette for all 10 tachs (not just the 6 in the sheet), you can't have any tachs with a different color
palette. The workflow is an image with all 10 tachs in it, then quantize it, then finally
copy each to their individual texture. Use the tachs_all.png file for this.
Why is it like this? It's how the game is able to switch the RPM graduations instantly when switching between different cars
during a replay. I guess the optimization is that it only needs to change the pixel indexes and that's somehow faster.
Since switching between cars is an instant transition, speed at all costs is required.


9. With the modified and quantized images, we can now create the custom files
and put them in the game.

In GT2TimSuite, build the target format.
For the sheet, select "Build 4bpp GT2 Tim Sheet".
Overwrite the old .tim file.
For the individuals, select "PNG to Standard Tim"
then choose 4bpp.
Overwrite the old .tim file(s).

We now have the modified collection of tim files.
The next step is to pack the collection into a single
multi-file package.
Click "Pack Multi-File".
Overwrite the old `game_status_files` file,
or make a new one of you want. Just make sure it is named `game_status_files` with no file extension.

We now have the modified `game_status_files` file.
The next step is to zip the file.
Using 7zip, open the old game_status_files.gz archive. (Right click, open archive)
drag and drop the new `game_status_files` file into the archive. Wait a couple seconds for it to finish.
Check the date modified in file explorer, it should now say the current time and date.

If your new game_status_files.gz wasn't already in the arcade folder, move or copy/paste it there now, overwrite the old one.

The game volume is now ready to be packed. Pack the VOL and then make a new disc image.

Run the game. Check for changes. Hopefully the HUD tachometer is modified with no adverse side effects.



Black-keying transparency demonstration:
Even though only 1 bit (either on or off) is given for the transparency information of a color,
4bpp tim files can still produce 5 bits of transparency resolution for colors.
How is this possible?

PS1 games use a de-compositing system that looks at a color and inspects the bits first.
The format is A1B5G5R5, so 5 bits (32 possible states) for red green and blue, and 1 bit (2 possible states) for transparency.
If it detects that the stp bit (that's the transparency bit) is on, it will process the color differently:
It simulates as if that color is actually 2 layers: A black background, and a semi-transparent color on top of it.
It uses a process to decomposite the color back into the semi-transparent color it would have been before it was flattened into one layer.
There's multiple possible RGBA values that flatten into the same color against a black background, so the priority here is to pick the brightest RGB values
possible, with the minimum opacity possible.

You can demonstrate this de-compositing by using an image editor.

Create 3 layers: A black background, a fully opaque gray pixel, and an empty layer for now.

Flatten the first 2 layers, then observe the RGB value with the color picker.
Next, on the other layer, draw a square / pixel, and get to a point where you can adjust the opacity value and watch the transparency
change as you move the slider around.
Make the color fully white and then drag the opacity back and forth. Get it as close as you can to where both pixels look like the same color.
That's how it works.









